Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, you know the drill.
NOTE CONF
The lights.
Come on.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Which means that we are starting the lecture.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this is the first lecture.
Proper lecture you'll get from me.
NOTE CONF
Um, Cordelia.
Arrogant me will alternate during the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you'll have me for this week, next week.
Um, and then after that, Erik, um, will do his
NOTE CONF
first lecture.
Um, just before we get into it, remind you that
NOTE CONF
on Thursdays, we're always doing the attendance poll.
Um, I put the QR code there.
NOTE CONF
The poll should be live.
You can lock in at any point during the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, in case I take this down in a second.
Um, I've written down the code here.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you can see it.
Um, if you not managed to get that.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I have a different code, a different poll
pole that I use for my lecture polls.
NOTE CONF
Um, I've written that down here.
I will put up a QR code for that one.
NOTE CONF
Um, once we get to the first of those polls.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, apart from that, this is a little bit on
the dark side here, I think.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
See whether we can do it somewhere in between.
NOTE CONF
Um, try this one here.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, the other thing is, if you've had a look
NOTE CONF
on learn recently, you will see I've made an announcement.
The first of a hand in assessment of the four
NOTE CONF
that we have, um, has gone live this morning.
Um, so you've got a week to work on it.
NOTE CONF
The hand and date for that is next Wednesday at
5:00.
NOTE CONF
Um, that will cover the material from last week.
Um, and some of this week what we're doing here.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So, um, without further ado, um, let's get into what
NOTE CONF
we're doing or take this off here.
I have this here at the moment.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In case you're doing the lecture poll.
So last week with Cordelia, you've done Gaussian elimination, and
NOTE CONF
I thought I'd tell you just a little bit my
personal anecdote about Gauss.
NOTE CONF
So that there is Gauss.
And as I had seen on the old German ten
NOTE CONF
mark note before the year was introduced, this was the
last series.
NOTE CONF
And if you look closely on that one, behind him,
you see some buildings there.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is a picture from a town where Gauss
was active, the town called Göttingen.
NOTE CONF
Um, and my personal thing is that this is actually
my home town.
NOTE CONF
This is where I am from now.
It goes a little bit further.
NOTE CONF
Um, there in Göttingen, it's the grave of Gauss.
Um, and you can see that this is a little
NOTE CONF
bit of a parkland.
And actually where I grew up as a kid was
NOTE CONF
about 200m away from this park, and we'd just hang
about there, and we literally used to play football right
NOTE CONF
next by that, that grave there.
So my, my thing is that I always say I
NOTE CONF
used to play football as a kid on the grave
of gout.
NOTE CONF
That's what gets you into mathematics then later.
But okay, so that's just the sort of, um, little
NOTE CONF
thing there.
Um, let's get into, um, what we're doing today.
NOTE CONF
And I think at this point I'm going to take
this one down, um, and go back to the other
NOTE CONF
ones.
So, um, lecture today is about what we call matrix
NOTE CONF
algebra.
Um, so algebra sort of how you work with expressions.
NOTE CONF
So this is really how do you calculate with matrices
and by extension with vectors.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's a few things of just basically calculation
rules.
NOTE CONF
How they out.
How do you multiply matrix by scalar this transposition, which
NOTE CONF
it cannot do for numbers.
And then the sort of main thing is going to
NOTE CONF
be multiplication of a matrix and a vector, and a
bit of where this is leading to.
NOTE CONF
Um, I don't think I'm going to mention managed multiplication
of two matrices either.
NOTE CONF
I think this will come tomorrow.
Um, and also the concept of a matrix inverse, um,
NOTE CONF
is what we're going to do, um, tomorrow.
So, um, let's set up some light-hearted, um, warm up
NOTE CONF
and I'm going, going to give you the other QR
code.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this here is the other QR code, and
I haven't.
NOTE CONF
Now I'm just I was hoping to do that on
my laptop and I am not sure.
NOTE CONF
So I think I can leave this open.
I can give me a second.
NOTE CONF
I need to note I don't want to reset.
I want to go back to my events.
NOTE CONF
There we go.
Uh, polls.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I want to have a timer.
Uh, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I think that should be all you need to.
NOTE CONF
You need to have my answers back.
Um, we've lost the timer.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I'm just trying to wanting to ask you,
what is your exposure to linear algebra matrices?
NOTE CONF
Um, and vectors?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Probably while you're doing that, uh, say that one way
of looking at what we're doing in this course is
NOTE CONF
that you may have seen matrices before expecting most of
you will see it in some way or form.
NOTE CONF
film.
But typically the question is what really are matrices?
NOTE CONF
Now you can do stuff with them, but you don't
really know what really are they.
NOTE CONF
And I think this is what this course Introduction to
Linear Algebra is aiming to answer.
NOTE CONF
But after that you will have an answer to that
question.
NOTE CONF
What really are matrices?
Um.
NOTE CONF
Right now, uh, I forgot my timer.
You cannot vote anymore.
NOTE CONF
The timer is out.
Okay, sorry for that.
NOTE CONF
I didn't see the time.
I couldn't calm it out.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Goodness me.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
I think I'll try to do this the other way
NOTE CONF
round.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
I was meaning to do the polls on my laptop
here, but that won't connect to the internet at the
NOTE CONF
moment.
Um, so I've got to try to do this differently
NOTE CONF
now.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so never study most of your studies.
Some vectors and matrices.
NOTE CONF
Some of you said that you've seen eigenvalues.
Eigenvectors.
NOTE CONF
This is something we'll do in quite a bit of
detail towards the end of this course.
NOTE CONF
And a few said that they've even seen abstract vector
spaces.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is very good.
NOTE CONF
So for some of you this will be new.
For others there will be quite a bit of repeat.
NOTE CONF
But do be aware that we are doing things at
university quite differently to what you've done in school.
NOTE CONF
We're looking at different things, looking at different aspects much
more, looking at how will we generalise these things later.
NOTE CONF
So even if you think I've seen some of this
before, um, please, please do pay attention to what we're
NOTE CONF
doing here.
Um, right now I'm on the wrong one there.
NOTE CONF
I need to do this one here.
So.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's get into, um, what we wanted to do.
Proper.
NOTE CONF
And I haven't set this up.
I set this up in a second.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's start with matrices.
NOTE CONF
So assuming we've got this situation we've got given a
matrix.
NOTE CONF
And I'm telling you the matrix has elements by J
where the I jth element can be calculated by taking
NOTE CONF
I minus j.
So if we're doing this which of these matrices am
NOTE CONF
I referring to.
And um.
NOTE CONF
I believe I can just do that.
Yes.
NOTE CONF
Somebody has voted.
So this seems to work.
NOTE CONF
So again I'm giving you one minute.
I'm not sure why.
NOTE CONF
We've got 2300 people on this course.
That is an exaggeration, right?
NOTE CONF
A couple of seconds.
We haven't voted yet.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Good, good, good.
NOTE CONF
Few have come in at the end.
So let's have a look at the result.
NOTE CONF
Right okay.
So this is more or less what I was expecting.
NOTE CONF
I think it's relatively obvious that A and D aren't
the ones.
NOTE CONF
Um but then the question is is it B or
C.
NOTE CONF
They're sort of just alternating.
So it's the question of is I and what do
NOTE CONF
they what do they stand for.
So this this really is a little bit arbitrary.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I think I'm going to, um, just spend
a couple of minutes on that.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I've got.
So I'm going to swap these rounds, um, so that
NOTE CONF
I can see, see what I'm writing here.
Excellent.
NOTE CONF
Um, so if I have a matrix B.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I want to sort of write down the
elements of this matrix.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You don't see this where there's a matrix P, there's
the matrix B, right.
NOTE CONF
Write down the elements of it.
I mean, I have to admit I usually have to
NOTE CONF
make a, make a diagram.
So you're going to start with element B1 one up
NOTE CONF
here.
Um and then it's element B1 two.
NOTE CONF
Then it's B1 three.
And then the second Rhodes.
NOTE CONF
Be two one.
Be two two.
NOTE CONF
Be two three and then be three one.
Be three two and be three three.
NOTE CONF
So I think this is reasonably, um, sort of, uh,
intuitive, um, that you say, because we're reading from left
NOTE CONF
to right, the first row.
Certainly.
NOTE CONF
First of all that we're saying, well, first of all,
B1 one B1 two, um, we are going to go
NOTE CONF
we've got to first of all start increasing the second
index.
NOTE CONF
And then if we go into a new row, um,
we start increasing the first index.
NOTE CONF
Um, another way to think about it is that it's
always with these indices.
NOTE CONF
It's always rows before columns.
And that's a useful thing to keep in mind.
NOTE CONF
So the first index here will tell you which row
you're in.
NOTE CONF
And the second index will tell you which column you're
in.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if I now go and say, I've got this
NOTE CONF
rule that I want to say b I j um,
is calculated as I minus j.
NOTE CONF
And if I then go and want to say work
out the B1 two element here.
NOTE CONF
So that's the one up here.
Um B1 two is then one minus two.
NOTE CONF
Um so this is minus one.
Um, and if I now look at b1 2 or
NOTE CONF
-1 there, um that is matrix C up there.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um but as I say there's something arbitrary about it.
Either get into the habit of drawing the diagram or
NOTE CONF
remember row rows B4 columns.
Um, that should help to get you there.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So, um, matrices got the wrong one.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So just recap here.
NOTE CONF
Um, rows before columns.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Also option C we have we have that right okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I talk about an M times n matrix
um this is a matrix with m rows and columns.
NOTE CONF
Again we're giving the rows the number of rows before
the number of columns.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
The jth entry there corresponds to the entry in the
NOTE CONF
ith row column again rows before columns.
And we have this notation that if I have elements
NOTE CONF
given I j by a double index, then the matrix
made of all those elements I'm going to write in
NOTE CONF
sort square brackets with a symbol I j in it.
So just saying this are the indices.
NOTE CONF
This are the elements that make up the matrix.
Oh and rows before columns.
NOTE CONF
Um, in case I haven't mentioned that yet.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So let's go.
We've got matrices and so far matrix is really just
NOTE CONF
a table of numbers.
There's nothing more about it.
NOTE CONF
So what can we do with matrices?
The first thing is we can define rules how to
NOTE CONF
calculate.
So easiest thing we can do is trying to add
NOTE CONF
two matrices together.
And I've given you a few matrices here.
NOTE CONF
And I want to know from you which matrices which
pairs of matrices can you add together so that I
NOTE CONF
can add every pair of these together, or only C
plus D or others, or actually I can't do anything
NOTE CONF
with these.
I cannot add these matrices together.
NOTE CONF
So again give me a second.
I'm going to reset the poll here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we're going to do the same thing again.
Again I'm going to give you a one minute, um,
NOTE CONF
for that poll.
Now I see that.
NOTE CONF
And you see the timer as well.
So about ten more seconds.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
150.
NOTE CONF
Good.
Good results.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Very good, very good indeed.
NOTE CONF
So now these all have a different shape and you
cannot add them together.
NOTE CONF
You know, you can only add matrices together if they
have the same shape.
NOTE CONF
Now very few I was actually expecting more have answered
B that we can add C and D together and
NOTE CONF
you might think that is okay.
I mean, if I ask you to add those together,
NOTE CONF
you know what you do.
You know, at first element of one vector with first
NOTE CONF
element of the other vector.
But this is a row vector and a column vector.
NOTE CONF
And they really are different things.
And it's really important to keep, keep in mind that
NOTE CONF
the difference that a row vector is not the same
as a column vector.
NOTE CONF
Although I have to say sometimes out of laziness or
space restrictions or so, people will write a row vector
NOTE CONF
when they really mean a column vector.
But we should try not to do that and keep
NOTE CONF
that in mind.
So a few things um, to say so we can
NOTE CONF
only add matrices of the same size or more, um,
precise of the same shape.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I add to m times n matrices, I'm
not changing the shape.
NOTE CONF
It's still m times n.
You must check that these two matrices are the same
NOTE CONF
size before you're trying to add them.
Especially important if you've got sort of long actually your,
NOTE CONF
uh, your, um, um, homework, um, has some matrix expressions
that I'm asking you to simplify or work with.
NOTE CONF
Um, although I think in that case all matrices happen
to be the same size.
NOTE CONF
Anyhow, um, remember row vector is not a column vector,
um, and vectors and to some extent are really just
NOTE CONF
a special case of matrices here.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
They're just um, n times 1 or 1 times m
matrices.
NOTE CONF
Um, depends a little bit on the interpretation.
reputation, but for the time being, you can think of
NOTE CONF
these of just special matrices, really.
Um, if I'm talking just about a vector, um, we
NOTE CONF
usually mean by this a column vector.
So unless it's clear for some reason that I want
NOTE CONF
specifically a row vector unqualified, if I say something is
a vector, it's always a column vector.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
So next thing is we can multiply a matrix by
NOTE CONF
a scalar.
Um, and we're doing that.
NOTE CONF
If I say k times a, I'm just multiplying every
element of my matrix by that scalar.
NOTE CONF
Um, now first of all, what is a scalar?
Um, magnitude.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Only magnitude.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Are you a physicist?
I think no, sorry.
NOTE CONF
I'm asking.
I think it's correct.
NOTE CONF
I'm just thinking, I think the sort of magnitude direction
thing is, I know from the physicist that they do
NOTE CONF
distinguish them.
I know that's right.
NOTE CONF
There's another answer there a number, a number.
Yeah, a number in this case actually will be a
NOTE CONF
number.
Um, in general by scalar I mean it's sort of
NOTE CONF
a one dimensional object.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
For what we're doing in this course, we will always
work with numbers, probably always with real numbers.
NOTE CONF
It could quite easily be a complex number.
Um, those of you who are doing mathematics, who will
NOTE CONF
take a more abstract way into things later, um, it
doesn't have to be a number.
NOTE CONF
It could be anything.
It is something that your vector space, your matrices, are
NOTE CONF
defined over some very, very abstract objects.
Um, as long as these things are one dimensional.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it's a sort of one dimensional object, whatever that
means in the situation that you find yourself in.
NOTE CONF
For us, this really is just the number at the
moment.
NOTE CONF
And just for completeness, um, I'm just going to go
do this here, um, on the visualiser.
NOTE CONF
Um, give me a second.
Uh, there is what I had.
NOTE CONF
So, for example, if I want to do something like
k times, um, the matrix one, two, three, four.
NOTE CONF
So, um, I really am just going to multiply every
element of the matrix.
NOTE CONF
So this is going to be k times one.
Uh, this is going to be k times two.
NOTE CONF
Or I can just write this as three k and
4k here.
NOTE CONF
So that's the matrix k times.
Um the matrix there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going slightly slightly fast through this because I
NOTE CONF
think at the moment I believe this is relatively straightforward.
Um transposed.
NOTE CONF
So if I've got an M times n matrix not
necessarily square.
NOTE CONF
Um, the transpose of the matrix, um, is the n
times m Matrix.
NOTE CONF
So now swapping number of rows and number of columns
whose rows are just the columns of the original matrix
NOTE CONF
in the same order.
Um, I've written there a you usually denote this with
NOTE CONF
an A and an uppercase T.
Uh, some people are a bit particular and say this
NOTE CONF
isn't really a T, there should be some geometrical symbol
there.
NOTE CONF
Um, but I think a T will do.
Um, and again, I believe I've got a poll through
NOTE CONF
that.
So here we've got a matrix, not square.
NOTE CONF
Um, a little bit more fun.
Uh, which of those?
NOTE CONF
There is the transpose of my matrix.
And again, reset the poll and start it.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And I'll show you what we've got.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Just about finished.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Very, very good.
Um, pretty much everybody's got the right answer to see.
NOTE CONF
I just noticed that, uh, seems to be always see
the right answer.
NOTE CONF
Or, um, should we agree the pose?
I find sometimes you need to be a little bit
NOTE CONF
careful of which actually is the first row, which is
the first column.
NOTE CONF
Um, especially if it's a non square matrix, but it's
more a matter of, of concentrating rather than not understanding
NOTE CONF
typically.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
All fine so far.
Now, now we're getting to something which I think is
NOTE CONF
a little bit more elaborate um, and more of possible
confusion.
NOTE CONF
So I don't want that.
I do want that.
NOTE CONF
Sorry sorry, sorry.
Confusion.
NOTE CONF
So, um, multiplication of a vector times a matrix.
Um, and I suspect that the majority of you will
NOTE CONF
have seen something like that.
Multiplying matrices is vectors at school.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there may be not quite in this manner here.
So Nicholson says the following in its definition.
NOTE CONF
Uh, he says in order to multiply a matrix of
the vector, we are taking the matrix M times n
NOTE CONF
matrix.
So we know that means m rows and columns.
NOTE CONF
And we're going to write this down as its as
its columns.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to note them.
So we're writing down this matrix really just as a
NOTE CONF
collection of column vectors here.
And that's a relatively standard trick if you're working with
NOTE CONF
matrices that occasionally, um, it's useful to view a matrix
as a collection of columns or as a collection of
NOTE CONF
rows, and then introduce notation to do that.
So the first column here we're going to call a1
NOTE CONF
and then a2 and then a n and just two
because we've got an m times n matrix to n
NOTE CONF
columns.
It means you've got n vectors here.
NOTE CONF
And every one of those vectors, um because we've got
Em Rose is now a vector with Em components.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So this is what we have for the matrix.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then we also.
We also got to have a vector and we need
NOTE CONF
a vector with n components.
That's important.
NOTE CONF
If you do a matrix vector multiplication that the dimensions
match.
NOTE CONF
So we have a vector with n components.
And then we say multiplying those we do the following
NOTE CONF
uh that we take the first component of our vector
here multiplied with the first column of our matrix.
NOTE CONF
And then add to that second component of the vector,
multiply it by the second column, and so on.
NOTE CONF
Um, so number of components in the vector has got
to be the same as the number of columns.
NOTE CONF
And we add that.
And that is the multiplication of a vector by a
NOTE CONF
matrix.
Um, and I think it's useful after doing this sort
NOTE CONF
of generally it's useful to um.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Wrong one.
I want to see what I'm doing with you.
NOTE CONF
To just do an example.
Um, so, um, matrix, I do we see that?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Matrix vector multiplication.
NOTE CONF
So you say we've got the following matrix here.
We've got a matrix one, two, three, four.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I'm going to do that.
Multiply this by a vector which I'll just call x
NOTE CONF
y.
Um, the only reason I use letters here are the
NOTE CONF
numbers that you sort of see where, where different items
come from in the end.
NOTE CONF
So um, and then I've got these two columns here.
So I'm going to call this here column A1.
NOTE CONF
And that here is column A2.
Um and then I say what this is, is the
NOTE CONF
first component of my vector times A1 plus the second
component of the vector times A2, right?
NOTE CONF
Uh, some people, I think, again, physicists probably like to
underline all the vectors.
NOTE CONF
Uh, mathematicians tend to sort of forget about that and
all the same thing anyhow.
NOTE CONF
Or in other words, we always have to keep track
of what certain objects are, um, vectors on special from
NOTE CONF
others.
So you just have to do things by context.
NOTE CONF
So this is, um, you have space there.
Um, x times one three plus y times two, four.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then I can go and probably need more
space here.
NOTE CONF
Um, and say, so this really is just a vector.
And I can now, um, do it for every component
NOTE CONF
of the vector.
So this is the vector.
NOTE CONF
Which component?
The first one is x times one.
NOTE CONF
So this is just x plus two y in the
first component.
NOTE CONF
And then three x plus four y in the second
component.
NOTE CONF
So this is our how we do matrix vector multiplication.
Or at least how Nicholson says that we should do
NOTE CONF
matrix vector multiplication.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this as I say, this might be this
way of doing matrix vector multiplication might be different to
NOTE CONF
what you've learned in school.
Uh, can I just ask for who have learned a
NOTE CONF
different way of doing this in school?
Um, so quite a few, uh, who has learned it
NOTE CONF
this way?
Also, slightly less suspect.
NOTE CONF
The others haven't done it at all.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, I say a little bit more about that, but
NOTE CONF
remember, this is this is doing matrix vector multiplication is
one possible way of doing that.
NOTE CONF
I've done the example.
So now we know what matrix vector multiplication Implication is
NOTE CONF
we need to think a little bit about its properties.
Um, so first thing I'm asking you.
NOTE CONF
So say you're given a matrix and a vector and
you can multiply them together.
NOTE CONF
Dimensions work.
Otherwise I'm not saying anything about that.
NOTE CONF
We know that A times x, the matrix vector product
is zero.
NOTE CONF
And we know the vector x is not zero.
Um, what does that mean for the matrix A?
NOTE CONF
Do we know that A is zero or not?
Um, and uh, let me just quickly go back.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
All right, so this is a bit more split now.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Some people reckon they've got a counterexample.
So I think I'm going to do what I said
NOTE CONF
I was going to do.
I'm going to do the poll again.
NOTE CONF
You've seen the results here and I'm going to do
the whole thing again.
NOTE CONF
You discuss with your neighbours.
Um, and I'll see.
NOTE CONF
Uh, see whether this makes a difference.
Just to warn you, if you say, just be if
NOTE CONF
you say a false and a half a counterexample, I'm
going to ask you for your counter example.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
10s.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That's right.
NOTE CONF
Nobody's changed their mind.
Did I do something wrong here?
NOTE CONF
Okay, okay, so, uh, majority thinks this is true.
And indeed, you would think so.
NOTE CONF
You would think so.
I mean, after all, if we're doing numbers, if I
NOTE CONF
do, uh.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay, which one do.
I'm not going to do this.
NOTE CONF
I don't want that one.
Uh, let's keep that up there.
NOTE CONF
The results.
So if I'm doing numbers and say axe equal to
NOTE CONF
zero, then I know that I have a equal to
zero or x equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
And this is relatively fundamental.
NOTE CONF
I mean, if you're doing things like, uh, Factorising polynomials
for example, and setting that to zero, you know, one
NOTE CONF
of the factors have to be zero.
This is something the argument comes at a lot of
NOTE CONF
the time.
And you've internalised that argument.
NOTE CONF
Um, now the important thing to keep in mind is
we're not working with numbers anymore here.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
We've now introduced a, a whole new concept of vectors
NOTE CONF
and matrices.
And we introduced rules of calculating.
NOTE CONF
And now we have to think about what things that
we used to actually hold in this case and what
NOTE CONF
don't anymore.
So this is the first thing that we're thinking does
NOTE CONF
this still hold.
Now people have said they have no counterexample.
NOTE CONF
Um, and so let me just go back to that
here.
NOTE CONF
That we know what we're talking about actually.
So who has a counterexample?
NOTE CONF
I think you're.
Sort of the matrix is 0001.
NOTE CONF
Zero.
Right okay.
NOTE CONF
Do I.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You can see it here 0001X0.
X or anything.
NOTE CONF
Zero.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I can do something like that instead of the
NOTE CONF
X here.
Doesn't have to be an X can be any number.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I could for example have a five here.
NOTE CONF
And then if I work out what is a x.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
First, first.
Uh, so five Five times zero zero.
NOTE CONF
Second element is zero times zero, one and five.
Times zero zero will give me a zero and zero
NOTE CONF
times zero.
One will give me zero everything zero.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't work.
Or in this case, uh, this isn't true.
NOTE CONF
I can't have x not equal to zero, A not
equal to zero.
NOTE CONF
And still their product is zero.
So as I said be aware that we're talking about
NOTE CONF
and we keep doing this in mathematics introducing new concepts,
introducing rules how to work with them.
NOTE CONF
But any properties that we think these things now have,
we'll have to be really careful and have to start
NOTE CONF
proving them and have to be convinced ourself that this,
that this does work well.
NOTE CONF
And there's probably one of the main takeaways from this
first math lecture, uh, for you, that you'll have to
NOTE CONF
get into the habit Um, of always checking that.
Okay, um, keep doing this on the wrong one.
NOTE CONF
So let's go on to, um, still matrix vector multiplication,
actually, but the other way.
NOTE CONF
So, um, for the other way of doing this, we
need the concept of a dot product or a scalar
NOTE CONF
product.
Um, and that is the following, um, that you say
NOTE CONF
I've got given two vectors of the same dimension, say
n dimensional, um, and I can now do the dot
NOTE CONF
product of these by saying by basically sort of zipping
them up, uh, first element of the first vector times,
NOTE CONF
first element of the second vector plus, second times, second
plus third times, third and so on.
NOTE CONF
And again, um, I think, um, just out of completeness,
I'm going to do an example.
NOTE CONF
Um, and I do this partially because I reckon, um,
the dot product is probably in this sort of operations,
NOTE CONF
what you can do with matrices and vectors.
This is probably the most used one.
NOTE CONF
You keep doing this.
This keeps popping up everywhere, and you keep having to
NOTE CONF
do dot products of two matrices of two vectors.
So um, if you're doing this this is one times
NOTE CONF
five.
Here the two first element multiply together plus the two
NOTE CONF
second elements three times minus two plus seven times one.
Um and if I do this so I've got five
NOTE CONF
um, five plus six is 11.
Um this is no minus six five minus six is
NOTE CONF
minus one plus seven is six.
So the dot product here is six.
NOTE CONF
Yeah okay.
Um, from the example be aware of the notations here
NOTE CONF
and be aware in two ways.
First of all, people use different notations for the dot
NOTE CONF
product.
I use this dot in the middle, and I think
NOTE CONF
Nicholson by sort of implication, does something like that.
Uh, I've seen, at least in some Scottish schools or
NOTE CONF
some Scottish school books, that they use a dot at
the bottom of the line.
NOTE CONF
Um, other people use this bracket notation U comma v
um, I believe, especially if you're doing stuff in sort
NOTE CONF
of more abstract vector space at some point, uh, or
the physicists tend to think it's quantum physics or something
NOTE CONF
like that.
They're half notation that are inspired by that.
NOTE CONF
Um, but these are all the same thing.
These are all the dot products and actually u transpose
NOTE CONF
V.
So taking the vector u transpose a row vector times
NOTE CONF
v as the matrix vector product turns out to be
the same thing.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and some people prefer to use that notation, uh,
for the dot product.
NOTE CONF
On the other hand, be aware that there's other notations
like u dot v, u cross v and simply saying
NOTE CONF
UV, which all mean different things.
So you dot v is the dot product that we've
NOTE CONF
done.
You cross V is the cross product.
NOTE CONF
I think we're doing that later.
You find the cross product is useful in three dimensions.
NOTE CONF
And it's something that I think those of you doing
computer science, computer graphics or physics that are quite often
NOTE CONF
working in three dimensions will use the cross product quite
often.
NOTE CONF
Mathematicians tend to not because we tend to work in
n dimensions rather than three dimensions, and there's no cross
NOTE CONF
product there.
You've just written like that.
NOTE CONF
I would interpret this as a column vector times a
column vector as matrix vector multiplication, and then it just
NOTE CONF
doesn't work.
Uh, the dimensions don't match, actually.
NOTE CONF
Um, so you can't do that, but be aware of
these different notations.
NOTE CONF
Um, so.
But if we know the dot product, Nicholson now has
NOTE CONF
a different way of defining what a matrix vector multiplication
is.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it says the following.
Each entry of the vector axe is the dot product
NOTE CONF
of the corresponding row of A with x.
Um, and again, I think it's useful to have a
NOTE CONF
look at an example here.
So um, if I say I want to do so
NOTE CONF
this is again matrix vector product.
Um and it's the row approach.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um say I want to do the following.
I've got one, two three, four And I want to
NOTE CONF
multiply this with x y.
So this is the same thing that I've done a
NOTE CONF
little bit above.
So it says in order to get from the result,
NOTE CONF
in order to get the first entry here, I should
take the dot product of the corresponding row of a.
NOTE CONF
So the corresponding row is this.
Here one two.
NOTE CONF
Again we're taking the matrix apart, this time by rows
and taking the dot product with xy with a vector.
NOTE CONF
So I like to sort of if I mentally visualise
that I take this vector then and sort of flip
NOTE CONF
it and put it over here.
So I mentally think there's an x here, there's the
NOTE CONF
y here.
And then I sort of sum that up.
NOTE CONF
So this will give me a one times X1X plus
A2Y for the first component.
NOTE CONF
And then we do the same thing with the second
component.
NOTE CONF
Flipping this over.
And I've got A3X plus for?
NOTE CONF
Why?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Same result that we had the last time, right?
Um, should say 1 or 2 remarks on that.
NOTE CONF
Um, we've got these two equivalent approaches of doing the
dot product.
NOTE CONF
Um, it tends of doing the matrix vector product.
What I've done here.
NOTE CONF
Um, I find, um, you might find it differently, but
I find this is easier to remember and easier and
NOTE CONF
quicker to do for hand calculations if I'm actually asked
to multiply matrix vector by hand.
NOTE CONF
Now, the other approach that we did earlier, um, doing
it by columns, tends to be more useful for theoretical
NOTE CONF
things if you're trying to derive, if trying to prove
a theorem or doing some theory tends to be more
NOTE CONF
useful there, but both are equivalent.
Um, now Nicholson decided to take the the other approach.
NOTE CONF
The column approach asked his definition of the matrix vector
multiplication, and then prove as a theorem that the dot
NOTE CONF
product way is equivalent.
That is just arbitrary.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, you could have done it just the other way
round.
NOTE CONF
You could have defined this dot product approach as being
what the matrix vector product is.
NOTE CONF
And proof the other thing as a theorem.
It's I don't know why Nicholson has done it this
NOTE CONF
way.
Personal preference.
NOTE CONF
But again, it's a concept that we see quite often
in mathematics that we've got a concept that are various
NOTE CONF
different ways how we could define them.
We define it in one manner and then prove that
NOTE CONF
all the others are equivalent.
So you will see that way of working quite often.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, so a couple more things.
Um, for the end of the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Um, one is identity matrix.
Um, so this comes up quite often.
NOTE CONF
Um, we have an identity matrix which is denoted by
an eye.
NOTE CONF
Or, if you want to be particular, I tend to
indicate this is the identity matrix in n dimensions, which
NOTE CONF
is the matrix which has once on the main diagonal
and zeros everywhere, everywhere else.
NOTE CONF
So what does this mean?
Um, so say I want i3.
NOTE CONF
Um, I am working in three dimensions here.
Um, so the main diagonal is this one here.
NOTE CONF
Um, I have ones there.
So I've got two, one, one and another one.
NOTE CONF
If I'm in three dimensions and everything else is zero.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the, um, reason for doing that, um, is
really to or the importance is really the following there
NOTE CONF
that you will find.
If I multiply the identity matrix with a vector, I
NOTE CONF
will get the vector back.
And again um, let's just do that.
NOTE CONF
So if I say if I want a more deploy
this here I three uh, times x, so 100010001.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
I've got the times x, y z.
NOTE CONF
Um, then well, let's do the column approach again.
I have x times 100 plus y times 010 plus
NOTE CONF
z times 001.
Um.
NOTE CONF
And that if I sum this up, this is an
X or the others are zeros.
NOTE CONF
This is a y and that is a z.
So I will, um, get my.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
I'm sorry.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I will.
Get my vector back.
NOTE CONF
Um, and we will see that this is quite often
with other things as well.
NOTE CONF
The identity, um, will not change something.
Um, note I just want to make you aware.
NOTE CONF
I've written my matrix, my vector X here as a
row vector here, and to be exact, I actually need
NOTE CONF
to put a transpose on this to say I want
this flipped.
NOTE CONF
What my matrix, what the vector x is should really
be a column vector.
NOTE CONF
It's got to be a column vector in order that
I can do a identity times x here with a
NOTE CONF
row vector, I wouldn't know what to do.
Dimensions don't match.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So that a transpose up there is important.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
I did say if I, I n if you really
NOTE CONF
make the dimension explicit, otherwise I will do.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So where are we with time?
NOTE CONF
Five minutes.
Good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There should be just what I need.
NOTE CONF
So I just want to say a little bit there.
So Nicholson has this theorem in there, um, where he
NOTE CONF
comes with all these calculation rules.
Huh?
NOTE CONF
Uh, actually, what are they called?
Um, can somebody tell me that second rule there?
NOTE CONF
What is that called?
Associativity.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, the others are examples of a distributive law.
Um, it's useful to get into the habit of sort
NOTE CONF
of knowing the names for these things if you're talking
to other people, again, especially as you're getting into more
NOTE CONF
abstract things, as properties of these objects you're working with
become more important than the actual values.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, again, these are rules, you might think if you
NOTE CONF
see something like that.
Well, why do we why do we do this?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I mean, these are stuff that you've seen 100 times,
NOTE CONF
probably when working with numbers.
Um, you sort of know the names, but it's relatively
NOTE CONF
obvious.
It goes back to the same thing that we had
NOTE CONF
before.
We don't know.
NOTE CONF
In this case, we've just defined completely new things to
work with vectors and matrices.
NOTE CONF
So we now need to think about what properties do
these things have.
NOTE CONF
Well, um, so we have that if I do a
times in brackets x plus y I can bracket this
NOTE CONF
out a times x plus a times y.
That is by no means self-evident.
NOTE CONF
Now we we actually happened to have defined the matrix
vector multiplication in such a way that this works well.
NOTE CONF
But we need to check that that is the case.
And the same thing with things like.
NOTE CONF
So I've now got a multiply scalar with a matrix
with a vector.
NOTE CONF
Or I can multiply a scalar by a vector here
or I can here.
NOTE CONF
This is that I multiply the scalar with a matrix
first, and then multiply that by a vector.
NOTE CONF
Three different types of objects are certainly not obvious at
all that something like that should hold.
NOTE CONF
So be aware that if we're working with these things,
always check that what you're thinking works.
NOTE CONF
You can actually do that.
You know, get into the habit of that need to
NOTE CONF
prove everything.
All right okay.
NOTE CONF
And I think the final thing before we stop it
here, um, now that we have a matrix vector multiplication
NOTE CONF
that sort of links it now up to what you've
done last week, um, this gives us a way to
NOTE CONF
represent linear systems of equations.
Um, so, um, we've got the following there.
NOTE CONF
We've got the system of equations.
Um, and I think let me just take what I
NOTE CONF
think.
I really didn't want to do anything more than to
NOTE CONF
point this out.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So I've got the system of equations that I can
NOTE CONF
now write this, um, as a matrix vector multiplication.
Um, so I could now say that I take a
NOTE CONF
matrix of coefficients, and in this case just the coefficients,
not the right hand side.
NOTE CONF
For Gaussian elimination, you've copied the right hand side as
well.
NOTE CONF
So I just take the coefficients.
So this would be three, two, three, four, six, seven
NOTE CONF
and eight.
Um and I can multiply this now by a vector
NOTE CONF
of unknowns x1, x2, x3 and say this is equal
to the vector of right hand side.
NOTE CONF
So this is five times nine, five and nine.
And if I write down something like that and I
NOTE CONF
now do the matrix vector multiplication, what I've written down
here, you will realise that this equation that I've written
NOTE CONF
down here, actually it's the same thing as the system
of linear equations that I've got over there.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, and this is really it's a little bit at
NOTE CONF
the moment, notational convenience because I could do something.
I could say, I'm going to call this matrix here
NOTE CONF
a yeah, I'm going to call this vector here x.
And I'm going to call this right hand side here.
NOTE CONF
For some reason right hand sides are always called b.
Um and then what I've got here is I can
NOTE CONF
write the whole linear system of equations as axe equals
to be.
NOTE CONF
So I can just write this as one single equation
which because this vectors and matrix is actually means it's
NOTE CONF
a whole system of equations.
But it does make this a, this is used quite
NOTE CONF
often and it does make things convenient of working with
that.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
We're just about at the end of the lecture for
today.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'm going to carry on tomorrow with matrix
matrix multiplication and then a bit more talking about that.
NOTE CONF
Um, see you then.